Physical Reasoning Challenge
A key application in computer vision is understanding physical relations between objects in the world. For example, self-driving cars must be able to use visual and other sensor data to reason about the location, speed, and trajectory of nearby objects in order to move safely on public streets. A robot working in a home or factory setting may need to use vision to solve everyday physics problems, such as how to pack items into boxes, how to place items onto shelves, or how to pick up and deposit items without breaking them.
In this project, you will develop an algorithm to solve a common visual physical reasoning task, which is predicting the stability of a stack of blocks from a single image. This task is challeng- ing because the stacks of blocks have varying appearances, and they may appear against different backgrounds with different lighting and camera conditions. There are many possible ways to approach the task: for example, you might try to identify the individual blocks in the stack and their relative locations, or evaluate the 3d shape of the stack, or try to identify holistic fea- tures that distinguish between “stable” and “unstable” stacks.
Whatever methods you choose, you are expected to evaluate these methods using the provided data, to critically analyse the results, and to justify your design choices in your final report. Your evaluation should include error analysis, where you at- tempt to understand where your method works well and where it fails.
You are encouraged to use existing computer vision libraries your implementation. You may also use existing models or pretrained features as part of your implementation. However, your method should be your own; you may not simply submit an existing model for this problem.
The dataset provided is a subset of the ShapeStacks dataset [1]. The images are synthetic scenes produced by a 3D rendering software. Each scene shows a vertical stack of blocks; the blocks have various colours and shapes (cubes, rectangular solids, spheres, cylinders) and the height of the stack varies from 2-6 blocks. Figure 2 shows examples of images from the dataset.
Your task is to build a model which can predict the stable height of the block stack, which is the number of blocks which have been placed appropriately such that they will not fall down. In a “stable” stack the stable height is identical to the total number of blocks. In an “unstable” stack the stable height is the height of the balanced portion of the stack; blocks above the stable height have been placed incorrectly and will fall down. Figure 3 shows diagrams of stacks which have a stable height of 3, which means that in each case the first 3 blocks have been placed correctly and are stable, but blocks above level 3 have been placed incorrectly and would fall down.
Figure 3: Diagrams of block stacks which have a stable height of 3. (a) and (b) are stable. In (c), the fourth block will fall down because a spherical block cannot support other blocks. In (d), the fourth and higher blocks would fall down because their centre of mass is not supported by the blocks below.
To build a stable stack, each block must be placed on a flat surface and the centre of mass of the block must be supported by the surface below. In unstable stacks, there is exactly one block placement that violates these rules. In all scenes, the bottom block of the stack is guaranteed to be stably placed, so the stable height of the stack cannot be less than 1.
You may use the provided training images however you wish to train your model. We have also provided some metadata for the training images, which you can use to help train or evaluate methods. You are allowed to use pretrained features, data augmentation, or supplemental images or data as part of your method. However, your solution must not use any of following:
1. Additional images, supplemental data, or metadata from the ShapeStacks dataset which were not provided with this assignment
2. Any models which were pretrained on the publicly-released ShapeStacks dataset
This assignment uses a custom train/test split of the dataset, so if you use the full public dataset or pretrained models, your method will be trained, in part, on the Kaggle test set. Any submitted method which involves training on the test set (or simply looking up the ground truth labels for the Kaggle test set) will be considered cheating and will receive 0 marks.
You should submit your predictions for the test images on Kaggle. Your submissions for Kaggle should follow the same format as the sample-solution.csv file provided on the LMS. The file should include 2 columns:
1. id = the image id (e.g., ’12345’)
2. stable height = an integer indicating the stable height of the stack
The evaluation metric for this competition is mean accuracy: correct predictions will be scored as 1 and incorrect predictions as 0 and the total score is the average over the test set.
Your report should explain the design choices in your method and justify these based on your un- derstanding of computer vision theory. You should explain the experimentation steps you followed to develop and improve on your basic method, and report your final evaluation result. Your method, experiments, and evaluation results should be explained in sufficient detail for readers to understand them without having to look at your code. You should include an error analysis which assesses where your method performs well and where it fails, provide an explanation of the errors based on your un- derstanding of the method, and give suggestions for future improvements. Your report should include tables, graphs, figures, and/or images as appropriate to explain and illustrate your results.

This dataset includes two image sets:
  train = 7680 images that you can use to develop and train models
  test = 1920 images that make up the Kaggle test set

The train.csv file includes some metadata for the training images:
  shapeset (categorical) = indicates whether the stack contains (1) only cubes or (2) multiple shapes
  type (categorical) = (1) easy or (2) hard
  total_height (integer) = the number of objects in the stack
  instability_type (categorical) = (0) no instability (stable stack), (1) unstable due to unsupported centre of mass, (2) unstable due to stacking on non-planar surface
  cam_angle (categorical) = (1) low or (2) high
  stable_height (integer) = the stable height of the stack
